[Music]
hello I'm alen s this is counting the
cost on Al jazer your weekly look at the
world of business and economics this
week
Israel keeps dropping tons of bombs on
Gaza it wants to replenish its stock
Western military contractors are eyeing
big
profits also this week more American
weapons are being delivered to Israel
how far will the US go with military aid
to the
nation and Israel's major offshore gas
field is shut could geopolitical
tensions threaten the nation's Ambitions
to grow its gas
[Music]
exports
Russia's invasion of Ukraine spurred a
global rush to buy military equipment
last year defense spending across the
world hit more than $2 trillion dollar
that is the highest level since at least
the end of the Cold War that's according
to the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute now the surge in
armed sales has boosted the bottom lines
of Defense Giants military contractors
and investors are now all eyeing an
explosion in financial turns as the war
on Gaza drives up demand for arms in
Israel shares in Lockheed RTX Northrop
groomin and General Dynamics have all
risen sharply since hamas's attack on
Israel on October the 7th and while the
Aerospace and weapon sector as a whole
has seen an increase of 7% in value this
is of course as thousands of people have
been killed in Gaza entire neighborhoods
flattened and even hospitals attacked
during Israel 's military offensive on
the Strip the UN warns war crimes may
have been committed by both sides of the
conflict well military contractors
discussed how the war could be good for
their business during their company
earnings calls that's according to
report published by The Guardian
newspaper and the responsible statecraft
Think Tank General Dynamics Executive
Vice President of Technologies and Chief
Financial Officer Jason akan was quoted
saying the following you know the Israel
situation obviously is a terrible one
frankly and one that's just evolving as
we speak but I think if you look at the
incremental demand potential coming out
of that the biggest one to highlight and
that really sticks out is probably on
the artillery side meanwhile the Biden
Administration is set to deliver
hundreds of millions of dollars worth of
weapons to Israel and US defense
companies are ramping up production to
meet the increase in demand miny
contractors direct sales to clients
represent a major portion of the global
arms trade us arms manufacturers
commercial sales abroad authorized by
the Pentagon reached nearly
$154 billion last year Well joining us
now from London is Andrew Feinstein he's
the executive director of Shadow World
investigations also the author of the
book The Shadow world inside the global
arms trade many thanks for joining us on
counting the cost so we have seen this
surge in demand for defense companies
defense shares is that something you see
that will continue for a while oh
absolutely these these companies and
their share prices obviously thrive on
conflicts especially the sort of
conflict that we're seeing um in
Palestine at the moment where there is a
constant need for new equipment
particularly what we call ordinance so
missiles and bombs because as Israel
drops bombs on Gaza they need to
replenish those that stock immediately
so that is a huge boom to these
companies so you'll see a company like
Lockheed Martin has seen an increase of
18% in its share price over the past
month um since the second the 7th of
October and is it us companies US
contractors mainly who are benefiting
from this or is this European
manufacturers and UK manufacturers as
well
so the prime beneficiary is obviously
the United States what is sometimes
referred to as the military-industrial
complex or the defense companies in the
US the US supplies anywhere between 70
and
90% of all of Israel's military hardware
that it imports from outside of Israel
itself but Britain Germany Italy in
particular follow fairly close behind
for the remainder of that so companies
like BAE Systems tson crook Leonardo
would benefit alongside the locked
Martins the northr grummond the Rons or
RTX as it's now called and General
Dynamics so it's a combination of
American companies and European weapons
makers as we heard me mention earlier I
mean we we've heard how some defense
companies been criticized for framing
the Israel Gaza conflict as good for
their bottom lines but they are in the
business of selling weapons aren't they
so it's not a surprise that war is good
for business well no it's not but it
raises a whole range of questions about
the morality of this business I mean how
I describe the business in in my book is
a business that counts its profits in
the billions but its losses are actually
counted in human lives so I don't think
the fact that war and conflict is good
for their business should necessarily
allow us to say that you know when
rathon or RTX CEO Greg Hayes says as he
did just the other day the fresh new
contracts resulting from Israel's
bombardment of Gaza would mean that
across our entire portfolio we're going
to see a benefit of this restocking this
doesn't let them off the hook and in
fact it's even arguable that they might
have a case to answer for in terms of
possible complicity in violations of
international humanitarian law and war
crimes when it comes to the US I believe
us defense contractors need approval
from the US government to sell weapons
overseas so does that moral decision
then fall on the
US well in some senses but the reality
of arms export controls in the US and in
European countries in the United Kingdom
is that these controls while they exist
on paper in theory are barely utilized
in practice so for instance the United
Kingdom a few years ago issued what it
calls an open license for ex ort to
Israel so we don't actually know the
Quantum of military equipment that
Britain has exported to Israel because
this license allows companies like BAE
Systems and others to export as much as
they want to Israel without any sort of
authorization the same has just happened
in the United States where they're
talking about this massive new 106
billion
authorization um to a number of what it
would describe as friendly or Allied
countries
but in the case of Israel with that $106
billion almost 4 billion of that doesn't
require any
authorization at all so the moral
impetus lies both with lawmakers and the
executive members of government who are
effectively giving themselves free reign
to export as much as they want to Israel
but also with the companies and yes it's
good for company business but because
you're going to get get an enhanced
return for shareholders doesn't in any
way negate the moral compromises of what
your business is and what it's
contributing to in Gaza at the moment we
now have two big ongoing conflicts the
war in Ukraine and of course uh the
Israel Gaza
war is there enough out there is there
enough weapons out there to meet the
demand uh caused by these
conflicts sadly there is there is more
than enough Weaponry that is produced in
the world 40% of It produced by the
United States itself there is more than
enough Weaponry to go around in all of
these conflicts and we shouldn't forget
that what the situation in Gaza does is
it also makes other conflict prone areas
like Yemen for instance in a much more
febrile position so it is quite possible
that the insecurity the instability that
we are seeing in Palestine could
actually have impact on Yemen where
there has been both a formal and
informal ceasefire in place for a while
but the sad reality is that there is
more than enough military material or
equipment to go around for the conflicts
that are taking place and for any others
that might arise Andrew Feinstein really
good to get your thoughts executive
director of Shadow World investigations
thank
you
thanks meanwhile Belgian transport
workers unions called on their workers
to refuse handling armed shipments for
Israel they said loading or offloading
weapons would mean supplying
organizations that kill innocent people
the union cited a genocide is underway
in Palestine while workers have seen
armed shipments going in the direction
of the war now Israel says it is
targeting Hamas and not civilians in
Gaza protesters supporting Palestinians
blocked a US military ship allegedly
carrying weapons for Israel at the Port
of Tacoma in
Washington Israel has received nearly
$130 billion dollar in US security
assistance since its Creation in 1948
that's more than any other country in
the world now as a war on Gaz
intensifies more American weapons
including smart bombs and interceptors
for the Iron Dome missile defense system
are being delivered to Israel President
Joe Biden has vowed to keep supplying
the nation with what it needs to boost
its defenses Democrats and Republicans
broadly agree on military aid to Israel
but both parties have attached
conditions to the bill Heidi Jo Castor
reports from Washington
DC with just a handful of members
voicing any qualms about sending more US
military aid to Israel the question
isn't whether the US Congress will
approve the Israeli aid but rather how
and when this is not about party or
politics this about the security of our
world security of the United States of
America President Joe Biden wants
Congress to send $4 billion to Israel
and as part of the same legislative
package $60 billion to
Ukraine the polls show public support
for Ukraine among Americans is falling
with conservative voters in particular
expressing concerns about a growing US
government deficit we want to protect
our our and help and assist our friend
uh Israel but we have to keep our own
house in order as well the Republican
controlled house took on the aid
proposal first removing the money for
Ukraine and insisting the money for
Israel be offset by budget cuts to the
Internal Revenue Service that's despite
warnings the measure would reduce tax
collection and ironically increase the
deficit so no the House GOP proposal is
not going
anywhere it's it's it's it's going to
it's dead before it even is voted on
Democrats control the Senate and support
keeping aid for Israel and Ukraine
together in one package and in a rare
sign of bipartisanship most Senate
Republicans agree a break from their
party members in the house everybody
knows how strongly I feel about helping
Ukraine and Israel like Israel Ukraine
was the victim of an unprovoked attack
by a repeat violent offender the US
currently sends $3.8 billion a year to
Israel it sent
124 billion since Israel's founding now
the Senate is drawing up its own bill
that puts money for Israel and Ukraine
together in one package which is sure to
tee up a showdown with the house version
one that will have to be resolved before
any money leaves the country Heidi Joe
Castro for counting the cost Washington
joining us now from New York is Colin
Clark he's the director of research at
the sufan group which is a global
intelligence and security consultancy
and a nonresident senior fellow in the
National Security program of the foreign
policy Research Institute thank you for
joining the program I think it may
surprise some to learn that Israel has
been the largest cumulative recipient of
US foreign assistance since the 1940s
with most of that money spent on
Military Support why have the US been
giving Israel so much cash a small rich
country and for so long well it doesn't
surprise uh me or or most of the people
uh in my circle I mean it's a common uh
topic of discussion uh Israel Egypt as
well uh receiving large amounts of US
foreign assistance a lot of it dates
back to the relationship with the US uh
being one of Israel's primary backers
and you know throughout
uh you you know the US political system
very strong links between Israel and the
and the United States as one of
Washington's closest allies for a very
long time and is there bipartisan
support for this military aid within
Congress because there were some hurdles
recently with the latest Aid
package by and large there seems to be
bipartisan support uh probably more so
for Israel at this point then for
Ukraine uh as that conflict continues to
to drag on um
I think it's fatigue excuse me I think
it's fatigue that the conflict has been
going on for his long people were
expecting different results I think
there was a lot of optimism that the
ukrainians would defeat the Russians and
now we're kind of it's the bright shiny
object r on to the the new issue and
people are paying attention to this
until this gets old it's it's really the
kind of EB and flow of uh I guess the
amount of attention that the US public
can pay to a specific issue at one time
there are some polls that suggest that
there are some Democrats Al in the
minority who are not supportive of this
military aid to Israel do you see at
some point their numbers
increase uh very likely uh over time
especially as we continue to see
civilian deaths I mean the numbers are
staggering uh the images are are
horrifying and so the longer this goes
on uh you know frankly I think uh the
more revulsion there will be at the just
the the really high lethality count and
uh there will be growing calls for
ceasefire for humanitarian pause and for
diplomatic pressure to bring an end to
the
conflict does the US Administration give
this military aid to Israel
unconditionally or are there caveats
attached for example protecting the
rights of innocent
civilians I don't think any Aid is ever
unconditional even if there are fewer
strings attached to uh military aid to
Israel it's always something that any us
Administration is going to be looking at
the US has continuously attempted to
pressure the Israelis to uh you know to
to mine civilian casualties uh it's just
you're you're talking about fighting in
a dense Urban environment which makes
that incredibly difficult uh and I think
again uh these images that are coming
out are having a real impact globally
but also on the US population
domestically uh and as we see that we
see Rising protests and demonstrations
including on college campuses uh calling
for the administration to uh to to
really try to press harder for a
ceasefire yeah I mean that's what I was
going to ask you do you think we are
seeing finally a moment where ordinary
Americans even politicians are finally
starting to question this Aid that has
been going military aid that's been
going to Israel for so many years I
really hope so I I think you know it
makes sense to take a step back and take
stop stock of uh where the United States
is sending money and what that money is
being used for we saw this a couple of
years ago uh with US military aid uh and
weaponry that was being sent to the
Saudis that was being used in the uh in
the Yemen conflict right and and just
some of the again devastating images
coming out of Yemen pressure building on
uh the administration to pull back uh
and pull back support to that conflict
to to to the Waring sides in that
conflict so uh there's always going to
be a reassessment but I would also
caution not to overestimate the the US
Public's uh interest in in foreign
policy because uh issues that tend to
decide elections are domestic largely
and so I think there's a fleeting
interest at the moment uh and that
likely breaks down along demographic
lines I think the younger generation
tends to be far more passionate uh than
than some older uh older generations and
and you know just look at the polling uh
for that for proof of that yeah I I'll
pick you up on that the fact that
Americans when it comes to voting are
affected by domestic issues I guess the
issue would be if this ends up costing
their bottom line I mean there's been
some concern isn't there that uh in
order to pay for this uh it's people on
the ground that may have to pay for
it yeah 100% And I think if you look
around the country there's a lot of
areas within the United States where
people are suffering they're you know uh
out of work uh you know food inse
and so there's a lot of questions of
people saying why are we sending all
this money overseas when we have so much
work to do here at home and I think look
that's a fair question right and that's
something that should be part of the
political debate there was the third
Republican debate in Miami uh and and
these are issues that uh need to be
asked to politicians right who are
running for political office why is this
happening yeah very good to talk to you
Colin Clark director of the research at
the sufan group thank
you thank you Israel is a significant
gas producer and exporter to countries
in the Middle East the nation was aiming
to expand its export routs to Europe
after the halt of Russian supplies but
production at Israel's second largest
offshore field was suspended on October
the 9th after Hamas launched its attack
on the country Rising geopolitical
tensions could hurt investments in The
Wider region and threaten Israel's plans
to grow its exports now according to
report by the consulting firm BDO Israel
the nation's gas exports have dropped by
70% since it shut down the Tamar field
that is worth more than $200 million a
month well the field supplies the
Israeli market and delivers gas to
Jordan as well as Egypt which provides
gas exports all the way to Europe
natural gas Fields off the Israeli Coast
account for nearly 70% of its power
generation Israel is now seeking
alternative fuel sources in order to
meet its needs I'm joined now from our
studio in Doha by Ahmed halali is's a
practice director of the Mina region of
the global Council thank you for your
time sir so according to these figures
by The accountancy Firm BDO Israel's
exports of natural gas has dropped by
70% that sounds like a lot definitely I
mean uh gas exports from Israel have
plummeted by 70% and uh the the worst
affected by this is its its nearest
neighbors its biggest customers as as of
today Egypt and Jordan the original
volumes uh reaching Egypt now are 30% uh
of the volumes that were reaching Egypt
uh pre-war and Egypt itself was the
export platform and the export
infrastructure in Egypt the
liquification terminals there uh Israel
depended on those to then reexport its
gas uh to Europe so those exports are
therefore uh affected as well uh less
Israeli gas is reaching International
markets um
and U uh internationally this will
create a bit of a squeeze but with that
said we shouldn't overstate the role of
Israeli gas in supplying International
markets because it only accounts for
less than half a percent of uh
International gas supply as compared for
instance to a place like qar where we're
sitting today which accounts for 20% of
of global uh natural gas supply but in
terms of Israel's own needs is it going
to have to find alternative uh gas to
fill the Gap well for Israel is
fortunate in the sense that Tamar isn't
its only active gas field it's its
larger gas field also off the co the
southern coast of Israel the Leviathan a
much bigger field also operated by the
US major uh Chevron can continue to
supply and continue to step up other
fields like Kish will continue to step
up and meet Israel's uh Power Generation
needs uh so it's energy security risks
remain contained but if if the shutdown
of Tamar does become a prolonged
situation then will have to begin
thinking about procuring gas
internationally from other suppliers you
talked about Egypt and Jordan to what
extent are they going to be affected
well respectively Egypt and Jordan uh
imported U 7% and 4% of of their total
gas supply uh from Egypt so um after the
attacks those exports to Egypt ground to
a complete halt they are incrementally
back now but Egypt will is is I would
say the worst affected and it has been
uh since the summer when it had an
unseasonably
hot summer and weakened domestic
production meant that Egypt was
introducing rolling blackouts and has
serious uh energy security situation on
its hands because of uh this
Interruption of Supply from Israel so
Egypt is now having to buy uh from be
from becoming a net exporter of natural
gas is having to buy LG uh uh tankers
and LG Supply from International markets
and what about Europe because they were
already seeing an issue in terms of
Russia and receiving gas from Russia and
they were looking for an alternative
Supply and they turned to
Israel now will they still be able to
fill that Gap that Israel was filling I
think they will because Israel was a
marginal supplier of gas uh uh to Europe
after the the the the Europeans
calibrated the response to the Russian
shot off of Gas by diversifying their
export base so they went to Qatar and
are now signing in other countries in
the US and signing long-term Supply
deals so I think they've they've
Diversified enough to be able to weather
uh this shock um uh now the war has
caused a surge in in European gas prices
in the Dutch uh uh forward the Dutch
Benchmark that's that's looked at in
order to gauge what's happening in in
the gas markets uh they're 30% higher
than uh October the 6th but that's not
just because of what's happening in
Israel and and Gaza it's what's
happening in Australia with LG
industrial action over there and a a
shot off in a uh in a Baltic region uh
pipeline so it's a multipolarity of of
of factors that's causing uh Supply to
be squeezed it's not just Israel okay
that was really good to get your
perspective Ahmed Halal practice
director of the Mina region at the
global Council thank you thank you very
much for having
me and that is our show for this week
get in touch with us on X forly known as
Twitter Malin do use the hash AJ CC when
you do of course you can drop us an
email count ofthe cost
al.net is our
address and has more fee online at
al.com CC that will take you straight to
our page which has individual reports
links an entire episodes for you to
catch up
on that is it for this edition of
counting the cost I'm alen s from the
whole team thanks for joining us news on
alera coming up
[Music]
next